URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.08595v1
PDF Size: 1.26 MB
Text Length: 71874 characters
Word Count: 10952
Estimated Pages: 43
==================================================
Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging
of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based
Web-Servers
Herve M. Kabamba1, Matthew Khouzam2 and Michel Dagenais1*
1Computer and Software Engineering Department, Polytechnique Montréal
2Ericsson Canada
Abstract
Adequate consideration is crucial to ensure that services in a distributed application context are running satisfactorily with
the resources available. Due to the asynchronous nature of tasks and the need to work with multiple layers that deliver
coordinated results in a single-threaded context, analysing performance is a challenging task in event-loop-based systems.
The existing performance analysis methods for environments such as Node.js rely on higher-level instrumentation but lack
precision, as they can’t capture the relevant underlying application flow.
As a solution, we propose a streamlined method for recovering the asynchronous execution path of requests called the
Nested Bounded Context Algorithm (NBCA). The proposed technique tracks the application execution flow through multiple
layers and showcases it on an interactive interface for further assessment. Furthermore, we introduce the vertical span
concept. This representation of a span as a multidimensional object (horizontal and vertical) with a start and end of execution,
along with its sub-layers and triggered operations, enables the granular identification and diagnosis of performance issues.
We proposed a new technique called the Bounded Context Tracking Algorithm (BCTA) for event matching and request
reassembling in a multi-layer trace . The two techniques allow aligning the executions of the request in a tree-based data
structure for developed visualisations. These visualisations permit performance debugging of complex performance issues in
Node.js.
Introduction
The rapid growth of distributed applications, com-
bined with recent advancements in cloud-based ap-
plication development tools and technologies, have
created a significant need for performance analysis
and optimization of those applications. This These
advancements come with a cost in managing perfor-
mance.The complexity of debugging is one of the
primary issues that arise in distributed systems, as
explained by Michels (23). Indeed, distributed appli-
cations often rely on many abstraction layers to ease
communication, deployment, scaling, performance,
and resilience.
Furthermore, the separation of services into inde-
pendent components, the containerization, the choice
of communication protocols amongst micro-services,
and various additional factors complicate the moni-
toring and debugging of these systems. Performance
analysis remains a significant challenge, generating
considerable interest in the topic. Although numer-
ous solutions and tools (9; 3; 26; 28), are available, the
environment in which the application runs, and the
technologies employed, generally dictate the method-
ology for evaluating the performance of these appli-
cations.
*Corresponding author: herve.kamba-mbikayi@polymtl.ca
Received: November 17, 2023
Distributed applications typically use distributed
tracers, to capture data on the application specific
interactions, at the expense of instrumentation. A
collector then aggregates the distributed traces to
make them available for the user interface mod-
ules (12). For instance, the collector can gather and
hierarchically aggregate the information about the re-
quest life-cycle, and the correlations between the sub-
request interactions with other system components.
For JavaScript applications, particularly those writ-
ten in the Node.js environment, the simple use of
distributed tracers to monitor and pinpoint poten-
tial performance issues creates a significant concern.
The Node.js infrastructure comprises multiple lay-
ers, each performing a distinct function in processing
and executing various tasks.
Moreover, the single-threaded nature of Node.js
requires the main thread to instantiate an event-loop
(EL), which orchestrates the execution of tasks by
passing through several phases (30), with the main
thread responsible for callbacks invocation on the
one hand. On the other hand, it dispatches lengthy
(possibly blocking) tasks to a thread pool to expedite
their execution and avoid blocking while waiting
for lengthy operations to complete. This intricacy
is all the more noteworthy, because relying solely
on a distributed tracer to instrument higher-level
functions does not allow for an objective assessment
arXiv:2401.08595v1  [cs.DC]  19 Nov 2023


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
of application performance in this context.
Such
environments require a greater level of granularity
to precisely determine the underlying cause of any
performance issue, since submitting asynchronous
requests to the lower layer does not guarantee serial
and instantaneous execution. The latter must first
be queued with other concurrent tasks and awaits
orchestration by the EL.
The time delay of a single request, or its nested
requests, is not a reliable source of information for
identifying the issue in this specific situation. For
instance, slow code execution can keep the EL in a
specific phase for an extended period of time, pre-
venting it from moving to another phase to execute
the many pending callbacks. In turn, the issue propa-
gates to other pending requests, increasing the delay
of other spans in the distributed trace. Since Node.js
applications load and interact with many other mod-
ules, non-instrumented functions are unable to give
performance metrics for diagnosing a specific per-
formance issue, resulting in fault propagation to the
pending requests.
Furthermore, the inner workings of Node.js pri-
oritize a set of tasks en-queued into specific data
structures, and ensure that they are exhausted before
moving to the next phase. If the executing code is
slow in this context, the transition latency between
phases will increase, and the application performance
will degrade. Consequently, the latency of pending
tasks will increase rapidly, even though they are not
the root cause of the problem.
This paper presents an efficient method for analyz-
ing the performance of Node.js applications based
on metrics monitoring and root cause analysis. We
use the Nested Bounded Context Algorithm (NBCA),
that exposes the request pathways, and the Bounded
Context Tracking Algorithm (BCTA), that reconstructs
the request vertical execution sequences into a span,
allowing for fine-grained diagnosis and pinpointing
of performance issues.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no pre-
existing efficient technique that allows a global per-
formance analysis with such level of granularity for
Node.js applications.
The following are the primary contributions of this
paper: (1) We present a novel trace span representa-
tion model, named the Vertical Span Model (VSM), de-
signed to describe the operations of a single request
across several layers and sub-layers, along with its
metadata. (2) We present a fine-grained method for
analyzing the performance of Node.js applications
using kernel and user traces. We employ a four-layer
paradigm to collect data at the JavaScript inter-
preter, the virtual machine, the libuv, and kernel
levels. (3) We introduce a new crucial performance
metric named the Atomic Task Time Latency (ATTL)
that measures the internal atomic tasks execution
time. (4) We build a state system model that cap-
tures the traces events attributes and metadata. (5)
A multi-level traces events correlation technique is
presented. (6) We demonstrate the relevance of our
tool and the effectiveness of our technique with real-
istic use cases. (7) We implemented many interactive
views for diagnosing system issues.
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows: Section discusses related work about the sub-
ject. Section presents the proposed solution. Sec-
tion presents some use cases to show our work per-
tinence and relevance. In Section , we discuss the
results obtained while in Section a conclusion on the
work is drawn.
Related Work
The rapid transition of programs from monolithic
architectures to distributed systems, particularly in
Cloud Computing environments, has created a sig-
nificant need for performance management (5). Per-
formance management, in this case, is analyzing the
behavior of the program in order to determine if
it deviates from its typical behavior and, if so, to
identify the root cause of the problem and thereby re-
solve it. Various works related to Node.js have been
proposed in the literature. The run-time monitoring
was applied to Node.js by Ancona et al. (4) to verify
the correctness of an asynchronous nested callback
in the context of the Internet of Things (IoT). They
employed the parametric trace expression to moni-
tor running applications developed in Node.js and
Node-KED, which is a tool built on top of Node.js
for flow-based IoT programming. The correctness of
the application is verified at run-time through appli-
cation tracing mechanisms, to check the compliance
of the system behavior with the expected behavior
defined by a specification formalism.
Chang et al. (7) investigated the process for de-
tecting atomicity violations in event groups while
studying the performance of Node.js. A task is a
collection of discrete, deterministic events. They ad-
dressed event-race conditions within the context of
many events. Tracing was utilized to gather infor-
mation about the execution of the analyzed system,
in order to predict and discover atomicity violations
within a set of events. The identification of event pair-
ings was based on the Happens-before relationship
present in the execution trace. Atomicity violations
were identified using predefined patterns.
Different approaches to the performance analy-
sis of asynchronous JavaScript applications have
been presented in the literature. Some approaches
2


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
have been confined to detecting race conditions us-
ing client-side web application code. Predictive ap-
proaches are based on the recording of a part of
the application execution by performing an analy-
sis of the different memory accesses and the causal
dependencies between the executions of the event
handlers, and the data of the various execution sce-
narios, which form the basis for the generation of
race conditions.
Jensen et al. (20) introduced a browser-based data
flow analysis for JavaScript applications named
TAJS. The authors focused on representing the Docu-
ment Object Model (DOM) instead of considering the
events in depth. The approach assumes at the same
time that any event generated by the browser can be
executed at any time but cannot be executed in the
context of separation of data flow, based on which lis-
teners are registered. GATEKEEPER was introduced
by Guarnieri and Livshits (15) as a tool for enforc-
ing specific JavaScript widget security policies. In
particular, GATEKEEPER allows for the detection of
unauthorized data flows. The concurrency problem
on the client side was addressed by Hong et al. (18)
who presented WAVE, which is a framework for de-
tecting concurrency errors. It is based on a model
emanating from the execution. Test cases are gener-
ated and allow to swap the order of operations on
the original execution flow. Any exception generated
as a result of the test, or any result contrary to the
original execution flow, constitutes an error reported
by the system.
Under Node.js, few server-side race detection ap-
proaches have been utilized. NodeAV (7), is only
capable of detecting atomicity violations. Davis et al.
(8) applied fuzzing to the Node.js scheduler for race
detection.
Internal Node.js queues were used to
randomize the association of inputs in order to maxi-
mize the probability of discovering faulty executions
during testing. This technique enables the identifica-
tion of several race conditions but is not applicable
to issues that manifest during the delay of specific
events. This method also makes it challenging to
identify the underlying cause of the performance is-
sue. With NodeRacer (10), investigations on alternate
schedules by selectively delaying events, without af-
fecting Node.js core queues, was conducted. The
work was predominantly influenced by Adamsen
et al. (1) and Adamsen et al. (2). The analysis is
based on the formalism of the happens-before rela-
tionship, which enables the identification of causal
relationships between events. The initial running of
the application enables the inference of the happens-
before relationship based on either a regression test
or manual interaction with the application.
The network performance of Node.js was investi-
gated by Nkenyereye and Jang (27) as they evaluated
the performance of a Healthcare Hub Server for a
Remote Monitoring System. For this latter, emphasis
was placed on concurrency, because Node.js contains
all the necessary technology to effectively manage
its issues. Throughput and response time were mea-
sured using Apache Jmeter(11). Madsen et al. (22)
used static analysis on Node.js to identify problems
in the events processing. According to their observa-
tion, ordinary call graphs are unsuitable because they
do not accurately depict the control flow implied by
the registration of event listeners and the emission of
events. Therefore, they proposed an extension of the
Call Graph and implemented some analyses using
the static analysis tool RADAR.
Most Node.js performance analysis tools tend to
focus on specific areas of action. As mentioned ear-
lier, various approaches are sometimes limited to
detecting race conditions, atomicity violations, or
analyzing concurrent flow.
These studies adequately demonstrate the com-
plexity of tracking event orchestration in Node.js
due to its nondeterministic nature in task execution.
They also underscore the need for tools capable of de-
tecting issues in this context. However, performance
problems in Node.js are generally addressed at the
highest level, typically in JavaScript. Bottlenecks can
occur in the lower layers of the architecture and re-
main completely hidden from current analysis tools.
More detailed techniques are required to identify per-
formance issues at the internal layers that orchestrate
and execute them.
Furthermore, the few tools that address specific
problems in Node.js use the Async Hooks API to in-
strument applications for collecting execution traces.
It is well-known that activating this API imposes a
significant overhead on systems. Node Compass in-
troduces a low-overhead approach to data collection
and offers a multilevel approach to system execution
traces. To the best of our knowledge, there is no
existing research on multilayer tracing in Node.js.
Therefore, it is imperative to develop more compre-
hensive and efficient tools for performance analysis
in Node.js that can delve into the intricacies of its
internal layers while minimizing overhead, as the
current state of the art falls short in addressing these
critical aspects.
Proposed solution
The Vertical Span Representation Model
The vast majority of Node.js performance analysis
approaches rely on distributed tracing to collect the
necessary data.
This information, combined in a
3


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
single trace, enables the observation of the request
execution latency in the form of spans. The metric
is the duration of the execution of each request com-
ponent, and it contains very high-level information.
The Node.js architecture comprises a collection of
components that may be classified into three distinct
layers. The top layer is the JavaScript interpreter,
followed by the internal layers, namely the V8 engine,
libuv, and the operating system kernel. Distributed
tracers Instrumentation present a significant chal-
lenge as they expose only symptoms of the poorly
performing application.
In general, the instrumentation will be performed
at the upper layer level, which can only provide an
overview of a performance issue, without allowing it
to be precisely pinpointed, due to the complexity of
the environment. For instance, calling a JavaScript
file read function may incur considerable lag, sug-
gesting a performance issue. However, this informa-
tion cannot be used to establish the root cause of a
problem. Indeed, the latency could be caused by a
blocking state in the EL or by the exhaustion of the
threads in the pool, to mention a few. As a result, it
is crucial to employ alternative performance analysis
techniques, offering a higher degree of granularity, in
order to isolate the cause of the problem. The VSM
provides the vertical representation of a span. In the
latter model, the various sub-layers of the system
involved in the execution of the request are used to
reconstruct the sequences of execution and granu-
larly display the span for a precise pinpointing of the
performance problem.
The span in Figure 1 was obtained by instrument-
ing a JavaScript readFile function call. The task ex-
ecution time (300 ms) is denoted by the span-shaped
label “A”. Label “B” shows the VSM, which depicts
the synchronous and asynchronous operations of
the different sub-layers that make up the span. As
seen in Figure 1, calling the readFile method, in the
higher layer, triggers a set of asynchronous function
calls that the libuv layer will execute. At this level,
the fs_read function may be transparently invoked
several times. The execution of I/O functions trig-
gers related system calls. Since function calls are not
sequentially executed in the different layers, but are
instead coordinated by the EL, it is challenging to
figure out the root cause of the performance problem.
The VSM enables the definitive identification of the
nature of issues at hand.
Asynchronous Operations in Node.js
The execution of asynchronous operations is a core
feature of Node.js that allows the execution of
other instructions without waiting for blocking and
slow tasks.
To do this, an internal orchestration
system in Node.js allows the execution of tasks,
and the storage of various related references. An
asynchronous operation in Node.js embeds a
callback function that is invoked at the end of its
execution.
Definition:
an atomic operation is the small-
est component of a high-level function that triggers
system calls or that can be executed directly by the
Node.js runtime.
Formally, the asynchronous operation can be seen
as a monad Jitani (21).
In Figure 1, the Node.js
readFile function triggers a set of I/O function
calls at the libuv layer, which can be interpreted
as follows: the fs_open function is called while the
fs_stat is passed to it as a callback. The invocation
of the callback function embeds the function fs_read
as a callback, and likewise, the latter is invoked with
the callback function fs_close passed to it as an
argument.
This sequence of asynchronous operations can be
represented formally as a monad. Consider R as
the result of executing the I/O function f at the
JavaScript interpreter layer. By projecting the ex-
ecution of the latter on the bottom libuv layer, as
shown in Figure 1, the result R
′ obtained there must
be equivalent to R. Based on Janin (19) work, we can
derive the result R by:
R = f1 ≫= f2 ≫= f3 ≫= f4 ≫= f5
(1)
where R ≡R
′.
The chained execution of these I/O functions
makes a monad reference memory that the parent
function can use to get the chain result.
In this
case, the monad reference precludes the execution
of higher-level functions. This reference points to an
active task. Under Node.js, it will often be a mem-
ory address used to access the value returned by the
referenced task.
Let m be a monad of type T, referenced by a pointer
to its forked action Pm, as modeled in (19).
Pm :: ∗→∗
(2)
fork :: m x →m(Pm x)
(3)
read :: Pm x →m x
(4)
Pm is a monad reference bound to an active action
of type m x, fork m is the activator of the execution of
the monadic action x and returns a reference bound
to that action, and read p is an action that waits for
and accesses the memory reference, to return the
value returned by the running action bound by the
monad reference p.
4


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
Figure 1: Vertical Span Model (VSM) representation. The label “A” depicts a span as it appears in distributed tracers. The label “B”
depicts a vertical span representing the flow of the request sequences in all layers.
In Equation 1, the chained execution of functions
requires the passing of arguments of objects refer-
ences bound to these functions, and to events that
provide information on the state of the function exe-
cution. The triggering of these events allows access
to the addresses containing the returned values. A
value indicating the ATTL is attached to each atomic
function f1, . . . , f5. The execution time T can there-
fore be obtained by:
T = Σn
i=1t( fi)
(5)
L = T + Σn−1
i=1 ∆(ti,i+1)
(6)
The overhead latency L of the JavaScript function
is computed by summing the waiting times ∆(ti−1,i),
for each function fi to be executed from the com-
pleted execution of the predecessor fi−1. In this case,
Σn−1
i=1 ∆(ti−1,i), constitutes the overhead of the request
execution, and a threshold must be fixed to its value
to declare a performance issue. The VSM allows the
visualization of each atomic operation, along with its
latency throughout the involved layers. The reader is
referred to the work of Janin (19) and Moggi (24) for
additional information on monad functions.
Task Transitions and Atomic States
The interpreter is the entry point for a JavaScript
function execution. This is the request S0 state, as
depicted in Figure 2. The latter is subsequently sent
to the bottom layer, which queues it. Then it moves
to state S1. The transition between the two states is
captured by the uv_send event in the trace. At this
point, the request is waiting to be removed from the
queue in the order in which it was received. The EL
conducts continual checks and executes the different
queued jobs in a First In, First Out (FIFO) pattern.
The task is then removed from the queue and again
queued for the corresponding EL phase.
Then it
moves to state S2. Function uv_dequeue is used to
instrument this transition.
Figure 2: Request states during runtime. Nodes represent the
state of tasks as seen by the Node.js runtime and edges represent
the transitions labeled with the triggered events.
The event loop will see the request and manage
its execution by the Node.js runtime, as it moves
through different stages. At this level, three paths
are possible: If the request is a Node.js operation,
the runtime executes it instantly. It then transitions
to state S3, which is instrumented by the run event.
If the task involves an I/O operation, it is pushed
into a worker queue and transitions to S4 state. The
latter, uv_submit, is instrumented. It will then be
pulled from the worker queue by a thread from the
pool, and the associated I/O operations will be per-
formed. In this case, it transitions to state S5. Func-
tion uv_workerq_remove is used to instrument the
transition. The third possible path for the task is to
move to state S6. In this case, the operating system
runs the task and notifies the upper layer through the
built-in asynchronous communication mechanisms.
Functions uv_fs_* and uv_socketRead are used
for many input and output operations. For example,
uv_socketRead is used to read from a socket. The
S7 state is instrumented by uv_done and is used to
indicate the completion of a task. This event returns
an atomic operation unique ID. Recall that an atomic
operation is one part of the chain of execution of a
request made by the interpreter, but there are many
more. The result can be sent back directly to the inter-
preter from S7 state. The transition is instrumented
5


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
by uv_send as the exit point. It can also return to
state S1 from state S7, if a monad reference was given
to the superior function.
In the case of the readFile function, the fs_open
atomic task returns a file descriptor that is provided
as an argument to subsequent atomic file access op-
erations.
System Architecture
Figure 3: Architecture of the collection and analysis system.
The system architecture is shown in Figure 3. The
data is collected through tracepoints inserted into
the system. The LTTng (Linux Tracing Toolkits Next
Generation) tracer is used to perform the static instru-
mentation. A native module called calculate allows
tracepoints injected into JavaScript functions to in-
voke the LTTng tracer libraries at the highest level.
Static tracepoints are also added to the libuv layer
to collect information on atomic tasks orchestration,
and in the V8 engine to collect information on the
asynchronous resources life-cycle. Kernel traces are
obtained with LTTng.
The system instrumentation allows two synchro-
nized traces to be loaded into Trace Compass(28) as
an experiment. In the latter, precise analyses and
algorithms are run, metrics are extracted, and views
are built to observe the system performance. Because
of its low overhead on the system (9), the LTTng tracer
was chosen from a set of tracers. LTTng is considered
today as the fastest Linux tracer (13). An extension of
the tool enables the analyses to be run for Windows
Node.js versions.
The process for conducting the analysis is as fol-
lows:
1. Start the tracer.
2. Launch the concerned Node.js application.
3. Stop the tracer on the host.
4. Run the analysis.
5. Use an interactive tool (Trace Compass) to visu-
alize the results.
LTTng generates and collects events, which are then
loaded into Trace Compass. On the latter, an event
analyzer was developed to handle our trace events.
Trace Compass is a free and open-source program
that analyzes traces and logs. Its extensibility en-
ables the creation of views and graphs, as well as the
extraction of metrics.
Nested Asynchronous Operations
Detection
The execution of a JavaScript function consists of a
group of atomic operations that happen across the
system layers. The Node.js environment handles
requests made at the interpreter level in a specific
execution context. It is feasible to obtain information
about the context id by inserting tracepoints that are
activated during the initialization of asynchronous re-
sources, and immediately following their execution.
1 app.get(’/compute -with -promises ’, function
computePromise (req , res) {
2
const as= async_hooks . executionAsyncId ();
3
const
ass= async_hooks . triggerAsyncId ();
4
calculate.send_event(as , ass , ’
js_open_computePromise ’);
5
const
hash = readData ();
6
const
updatePromise = () => new
Promise ((
resolve) =>{
7
calculate.send_event ( async_hooks .
executionAsyncId (), async_hooks .
triggerAsyncId (), ’jsx_updatePromise ’);
8
hash.update ();
9
resolve (); });
10
const
loop = () => {
11
updatePromise ().then(loop).then(
calculate.send_event(as , ass , ’
js_exit_computePromise ’));
12
} }
13
loop ();
});
Listing 1: JavaScript instrumented code snipet. The calculate
module is the C++ addon that calls the LTTng functions
activating the tracepoints.
The
uv_send
event
is
used
to
instrument
JavaScript functions and to track the asynchronous
objects life-cycle. In Listing 1, the AsyncHooks API
is used along with the calculate module. The lat-
ter accepts an id, a channel, and a method as argu-
ments. When an HTTP request is received, function
ComputePromise is called. A tracepoint is then trig-
gered embedding the information about the execu-
tion context id as well as the id of the resource that
triggered the current asynchronous object. At line 4,
the function entry point is instrumented. Informa-
tion about the request context identification number
can be found in the id field, while information about
the id of the resource that triggered the current con-
text can be found in the channel field. There is a
field called method that has the name of the func-
tion that was instrumented. In this instance, it is
computePromise. The channel field can also contain
the name of the asynchronous resource, like promise
or FSReqCallback, among many others.
It is ob-
tained by getting the value of the type variable.
6


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
Figure 4: Execution Flow and Nested Asynchronous Operations. The Control Flow perspective shows a timeline of the multi-layer
events. At the bottom, the Node TimeGraph view depicts atomic operations flow in the middle and their executions contexts numbers
in the left.
At the end of the function execution, uv_send from
the calculate module is used again to signal the
completion of the request.
It can be observed at
line 11 in the Listing 1. In this instance, the id field
includes the same unique identifier as the initial re-
quest, the channel field is null, and the field method
has the “js_exit” value. In this case, it signifies the
end of the JavaScript function execution. At line 6
a new asynchronous resource is triggered creating a
new execution context bound for the asynchronous
resource. The latter is instrumented at line 7. In this
case, the execution context id is new. The id of the
resource that triggered the new object, is the execu-
tion context id of the computePromise function. We
do not need to instrument the completion of asyn-
chronous resources, since this will be obtained from
the V8 engine directly. The NCBA algorithm uses the
uv_send event to figure out the nested execution or-
der of the atomic operations. Instrumentation of the
JavaScript function entry and exit points is needed
to get back the time it took to run.
However, the goal of the algorithm is to figure out
the nested flow of operations. In response to the
uv_send event, the latter will look at the value of the
channel field, which contains the id of the resource
execution context, and will query the State History
Tree (SHT). The SHT is a tree-shaped data structure
that efficiently stores and indexes the attributes and
the states extracted from the trace. It will get the
id of the parent resource that created the current
resource execution context. This SHT will be queried
again using the obtained parent resource execution
context id to obtain the quarkParent, which is the
value specifying the position in the SHT at which a
new child entry will be created.
The algorithm will store the new entry position
once more, and will update its status with the name
of the method in the SHT. It will then monitor the
“run” or “resolve” values in the method field of the
uv_send event, to later alter the entry status, initially
set to null, based on the id. This signals the end of
the asynchronous resource execution. As it traverses
the trace, the algorithm repeats the same operations.
Finally, the algorithm outputs an SHT comprising all
the operations, in hierarchical order, along with their
execution time.
In Figure 4, on the left panel of the Node Time-
Graph view, the execution context IDs of the different
atomic operations are identified and displayed in a
hierarchical order, as computed by the algorithm. For
instance, the readFile function, executed at the top
layer, triggered the execution of the fs_open function
on the 18772 execution context, at the libuv layer.
The latter triggered the execution of the fs_stat
function on the execution context 18778, which again
triggered the execution of the fs_read function on
the execution context 18779, and finally the latter
triggered the execution of the fs_close function on
the execution context 18791. On the right panel, the
computed nested execution flow can be seen. Some
operations may trigger promises, and the latter may
trigger atomic operations within their execution con-
texts. Exposing the execution flow allows a granular
identification of the root cause of performance issues.
Multi-layer Events Matching
In the context of multi-layer event matching, our
focus is directed towards two primary concepts: ver-
tical profiling and calling-context profiling. The first
has been investigated by Hauswirth et al. (16) and
Hauswirth et al. (17). It entails profiling various met-
rics from various layers of the system stack. Analysis
of application performance is complicated by the ad-
7


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
dition of multiple abstraction layers to the execution
environment. The methodologies investigated and
suggested for vertical profiling predominantly rely
on multi-layered systems that enable multi-threading.
Nevertheless, these methodologies are not congruent
with event-driven systems such as Node.js.
Figure 5: Multi-layer trace. Event from different layers are ag-
gregated and loaded as an experiment. For clarity some contents,
fields and timestamps have been omitted
The operating system views these systems as black-
box devices whose operations are not executable in
a deterministic manner. An EL orchestrating their
execution introduces a horizontal overhead. This EL
also adds an extra layer of abstraction, complicating
any performance analysis. Calling-context profiling
Ausiello et al. (6) and Moret et al. (25), uses a tree
data structure to provide dynamic metrics for each
calling-context.
We propose a new approach that uses a state sys-
tem created from trace attributes data. It employs a
state history tree (SHT), a data structure that is op-
timised during the construction of our model while
traversing the trace, to store the attributes extracted
from the latter. The platform for modelling and de-
veloping such data structures is provided by Trace
Compass. Their optimisation enables access to the
model with a logarithmic complexity. Taking into
account the two proposed concepts, we developed a
profile of the analysed system based on the upstream
trace. This is a crucial and difficult step, particularly
considering there is virtually no literature on the
subject.
It is obvious that building a calling-context profile
within the same layer is a straightforward approach.
However, in such a setting, it is quite difficult to cor-
relate the same information, arriving from various
layers, while also connecting them to the functions
from higher layers. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no documented method for accomplishing
this using Node.js. Our Node Compass approach in-
struments, aggregates, and constructs a model util-
ising the state system and SHT data structures. The
latter is constructed by looking for patterns in the
multi-layer trace that enable the reconstruction, of the
vertical and horizontal execution sequences, of the
system under inspection. The end result is a visual
and interactive instrument that enables the user to
identify problems.
Basically, two types of traces are obtained from
the system instrumentation, as depicted in Figure 5:
userspace and kernel-space traces. The BCTA is used
to look for patterns in the multi-layer traces and
allows the correlation of events. In Figure 2, after
being submitted in the upper layer, the request moves
to state S2, where the intermediary layers manage its
execution. It can be observed that the request can
take the following state paths: S0 →S1 →S2 →
S3 →S7 →S0, S0 →S1 →S2 →S6 →S7 →S0,
and S0 →S1 →S2 →S4 →S5 →S7 →S0. In the
first case, it is a Node.js non-computational intensive
task. Il is executed right away by the runtime. In
this case, the higher-layer function is instrumented
by the uv_send event, which identifies the entry and
exit points of the function Figure 5 (labels 1 and 13).
In the second case, the task execution is delegated
to the operating system (OS). The interpreter, the
kernel, and the libuv layers will all be involved in
the event matching process, Figure 5 (labels 5b, 6b
and 8c). At this level, events that cause the OS to run
system calls are captured. These latter are sequen-
tially preceded by a resource initialization process in
the virtual machine, Figure 5, label 5b. Directly in-
serted tracepoints enable to obtain the information on
the execution context, and the name of the resource
being executed. The BCTA will first look for the clos-
est uv_send event that precedes the libuv atomic task
(label 6b) based on its thread ID, since both events are
sequential. This uv_send event, obtained from the VM
instrumentation, provides the context data required
to match the appropriate JavaScript function, in-
strumented with the AsyncHooks API. Consequently,
it is possible to reconnect operations from these three
layers, as Figure 5 shows. The upper layer and the
Figure 6: Resulting vertical span from the NBCA and BCTA
execution of the trace in Figure 5
libuv events are linked by creating a new child entry
at the position of the JavaScript initial function in
the SHT. To match the kernel events, the BCTA tracks
all system calls executed by the same thread. It cre-
ates child entries at the corresponding libuv atomic
task position in the SHT for each one, as long as the
8


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
request execution is not completed. This information
is obtained by watching the uv_send events, which
signal the JavaScript functions exit point. The al-
gorithm uses this information as a constraint, before
searching for patterns. These execution bounds are
named the Bounded Execution Context (BEC).
For the third case, consider the execution of a
JavaScript function that opens a file.
The libuv
layer utilises a thread pool, which simulates the asyn-
chronous execution for blocking processes. Thus,
it can continue its execution and move through the
various phases, invoking the callbacks that are await-
ing execution. In the trace presented in Figure 5,
the ComputePromise function that opens a file is
called.
The instrumentation of the beginning of
the function execution triggered the event uv_send
with the id=324. The BCTA will track the resource
id=324 and reach label 2. A promise is created from
the execution context of the higher level function
ComputePromise. The BCTA will keep tracking the
id which is now 17786 and reach label 3, where a
new promise has been created from the execution
context of the preceding promise. It will then track
the id=17787 which captures the beginning of a file
system operation. Constrained by the BEC, the BCTA
relies on the events uv_async_file, uv_submit, and
uv_workerq_remove, which respectively indicate, the
beginning of a file system atomic task, the queuing
of the task by the main thread executing the EL, and
its removal from the queue by an available thread in
the pool. These events are obtained from the libuv
instrumentation. It can be observed in Figure 5, label
7, how a thread from the pool is removing the task
from the queue (different thread ID). The algorithm
seeks for the uv_send event from the VM instrumen-
tation that immediately precedes the uv_async_file
event, as depicted in Figure 5, label 4. In this way,
the execution context information is obtained by the
algorithm.
These events provide the BCTA with sufficient in-
formation to establish a connection between the task
being executed by the thread and the main process
that runs the EL, as well as the initial JavaScript
function. The atomic operation id is determined by
the sequential uv_async_file event that precedes
the uv_submit event. Both events are always sequen-
tial(label 5). The thread ID is used to match kernel
events(labels 8, 8b). The SHT is then updated by cre-
ating the child entries corresponding to the detected
kernel events. Figure 6 depicts the resulting vertical
span from the trace in Figure 5 as outputted by the
analysis.
Use-Cases
This section investigates five realistic issues to illus-
trate the range of applications of the proposed new
algorithms and methodology. Additionally, the use-
cases demonstrate the effectiveness of the method-
ology in identifying and addressing performance
issues for various problem types and contexts.
Use case 1 represents a common scenario encoun-
tered by node.js application developers. We demon-
strate the efficacy of Node Compass in detecting
Regular Expressions Denial of Service (ReDOS) in
application modules. Such a vulnerability permits
malicious code to obstruct the EL in a particular
phase, thereby delaying the execution of pending
callbacks(14) (34). Use case 2 represents one partic-
ular characteristic of our tool. It demonstrates its
distinctiveness by revealing to what extent garbage
collection operations can affect the execution time of
an atomic operation in Node.js. Our tool is subjected
to a realistic issue raised by developers on Github.
Use case 2 represents one particular characteristic
of our tool. It demonstrates the distinctiveness of
our tool by revealing to what extent garbage collec-
tion operations can affect the execution time of an
atomic operation in Node.js. Our tool is subjected
to a realistic issue raised by developers on Github.
The third use case illustrates how our tool can be
used to detect memory leaks in Node.js applications.
The performance is monitored by the utilisation of
offline profiling of memory consumption, based on
the collected trace. Use case 4 demonstrates how our
tool can track Inter-process Communication (IPC) to
conduct a performance analysis.
The last use case is a particular instance on how a
root cause analysis can be driven by Node Compass.
The experiments were conducted with Node.js
versions 12.22.3 and 16.1.0, on an I7 Core running
Ubuntu 20.4 with 16 GB RAM.
Detecting REDOS Vulnerabilty in Node.js
Our tool capability to spot ReDOS vulnerabilities in
Node.js is highlighted in the first use case. It is not
uncommon for certain modules loaded in applica-
tions to have this type of vulnerability. They have
been investigated by Staicu and Pradel (32). Exe-
cuting vulnerable code in the application can cause
the event loop to block and errors to propagate to
requests awaiting execution. Collected high-level in-
formation from distributed tracers cannot expose the
source of the problem. Accurately identifying the
layer responsible for latency propagation requires a
multilevel analysis approach.
In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of our
technique in identifying ReDOS vulnerabilities, we
9


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
employed the benchmark resulting from the work
of Staicu and Pradel (32). The latter encompasses
numerous JavaScript RedOS vulnerabilities and
exploits, that have been documented and detected
across multiple accessible modules. Node Compass
was able to identify all performance issues caused by
them. To demonstrate how our tool operates, we have
selected one vulnerable module from the benchmark
as a showcase.
Figure 7 illustrates a performance issue that is trig-
gered by calling the resolve JavaScript function
of the Domain Name Service (DNS) Node.js mod-
ule. It takes approximately 3.9 seconds to execute.
Our tool permits the correlation of high-level infor-
mation with lower layers, such as the libuv and V8
layers, in order to identify the underlying cause of
the problem. Examining Figure 7 reveals that the EL
is halted in the polling phase, following the initiation
of high-level JavaScript function execution. As a
result of the developed analyses, the correlation be-
tween distinct layers is obvious. The activation of the
tracepoint at the VM, by invoking the exec function ,
confirms the suspicion of a ReDOS exploit. The latter
function processes regular expressions. The corre-
lation of those informations, from different layers,
results in the visual alignment of the events and the
reconstruction of their internal operations.
Correlating Performance issues with
Garbage Collector Operations
The
Node.js
runtime
executes
submitted
JavaScript code at the interpreter level.
An
executed JavaScript function may exhibit latency
that deviates from its normal behavior. Although
the performance issue can be diagnosed in this case,
the root cause cannot be identified.
The vertical
reconstruction of the execution sequences of a
function enables the association of the different
atomic operations with their execution context. To
this extent, it allows the identification of atomic
operations at the root of the performance problem,
as well as the layer in which the issue is located.
Our approach effectiveness, and level of granular-
ity, in exposing performance issues is demonstrated
in this use case. Node.js developers reported issue
#37583 on GitHub. A performance degradation was
observed by using the fs.promise.readFile func-
tion, in comparison to the fs.readFile.
The
performance
issue
was
replicated
in
Node.js
version
12
by
executing
the
sug-
gested
benchmark,
which
measures
the
per-
formance
of
fs.readFileSync, fs.readFile,
and
fs.promises.readFile.
Calling
fs.promise.readFile to read a 1 MB file was
slower than fs.readFile.
Our tool could exposed the execution flow of those
two distinct reading functions.
The fs.readFile
function reads the entire file in a single function call.
However, in the case of the fs.promise.readFile,
the latter is split into many fs_read calls at the libuv
layer. In Figure 8, we can see how memory operations
from the garbage collector (GC) impact atomic read
operations, increasing their latency by destroying
memory resources linearly. Atomic read operations
are blocked as a result. The general execution time
for an atomic fs_read operation in Figure 8 is ap-
proximately 50 microseconds. The memory pass of
the garbage collector disrupts certain fs_read read
operations that require between 3ms and 11ms to
complete. This has the overall consequence of increas-
ing the execution time of the higher level function,
because promise type resources are created in the
memory in large numbers, and must be destroyed by
the GC to optimize memory usage.
Node Compass stands out for its high level of gran-
ularity, which enables the identification of perfor-
mance issues with exceptional precision. Our intro-
duced metric ATTL measures the execution time of an
atomic operation. To the best of our knowledge, there
is no performance analysis approach in the literature
for accomplishing this in Node.js.
Memory leak Detection
In this use case, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach in profiling resources based on defined
metrics. Node Compass analyzes GC behavior using
2 specific metrics. The Time Spent in the Garbage
Collection (TIGC) and the Time Between 2 GC Opera-
tions (TBGC). We utilized the Node.js memory leaks
benchmark 1, which encompasses 4 types: (Global,
promise, cache, enclosures).
Node Compass exposed memory leak-related per-
formance issues suspicions in all 4 cases using the
defined metrics. We select one type of leaks (cache
type) to discuss the Node Compass uncovering mech-
anisms, and demonstrate how our tool works. The
same methodology applies to all types. The absence
of memory leaks is reflected in Figure 10, which
depicts the regular execution profile of the Node.js
process. The time spent between two garbage col-
lections is constantly more than the time spent in
garbage collection (red).
An optimal execution profile for the process appli-
cation is achieved in such a situation. A difference
can be observed in Figure 10 that shows the profile
of the Node.js process exposing a memory leak. As
seen, both metrics balance each other, raising a suspi-
cion on heap problem. We observed this pattern in
1 https://github.com/Joker666/nodejs-memory-leak
10


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
Figure 7: Calling the resolve function from the DNS module. The event loop is stalled for 4 seconds, due to a REDOS vulnerabilty
exploited. It takes 3.92 seconds for the resolve function to complete.
Figure 8: VSM of the "fs.promise.readFile" execution. Atomic operations at libuv layer can been seen in the bottom perspective. The
read operation is split into many atomic fs_read. The top perspective show linear events triggered as result of the GC operation.
Figure 9: VSM of the "fs.readFile" execution. Atomic operations at libuv layer can been seen. they are triggered by promises. To
read a file, the atomic functions fs_open, fs_stat, fs_read, fs_close are called respectivly.
Figure 10: Execution of the Cache type memory leak benchmark. Normal profile of the execution with no memory leak
each memory leaks context.
11


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
Figure 11: Execution of the Cache type memory leak benchmark with memory leaks
Exposing Inter-process Communication
issues
We tested our performance analysis approach on
a use case that involves inter-process communica-
tion (IPC). The latter was raised by the developers at
Ericson Canada, the main committers of Theia. Our
approach was successful in revealing the nature of
the error. The Node.js GitHub site highlighted an is-
sue with reference to #43936, explaining that data on
Windows gets "clogged" in extra pipes when forking
a child_process.
The distinguishing factor of this use case is its
connection to the Windows NT environment. Our
tool global application for multi-level performance
analysis in Node.js is demonstrated in this context.
Node Compass has the capability to trace, aggregate,
and analyze events from the Windows OS without
modifying its approach. Our instrumented Node.js
versions can be compiled with a flag indicating the
use of the "barectf" library in its trace collection archi-
tecture. The tracepoints within Node.js remain un-
changed, with modifications made only at the tracer
level. The tracer that was defined with barectf is
responsible for collecting these events. Barectf pro-
duces a file in the Common Trace Format (CTF), the
same format used by LTTng.
The use case pertains to a performance issue that
occurs when a primary process (main.js) forks a
child process (fork.js) with an additional open pipe.
In normal operation, the child process automati-
cally responds to pings from the parent process with
pongs. In a similar manner, the parent process re-
sponds with a ping after reading the pong. This
type of interaction makes process monitoring possi-
ble. Therefore, a rapid message exchange between
the two processes is required.
During the execution of this procedure on Win-
dows 10, the communication was hindered to a cer-
tain extent. Node Compass was used to identify
the IPC communication flow within the ecosystem,
to identify the problematic process, among others.
Based on Figure 12 "Node Control Flow" view, the
processes interactions can be observed, and the block-
ing processes can be identified. It is of utmost im-
portance to explicitly indicate that the pipe is "over-
lapped", particularly in the context of Windows, to ad-
here to the Windows API requirements. The pipe for
the various OS is not abstracted by Libuv. Therefore,
the overlapped communication was denied, causing
the parent process to remain blocked while it awaits
the pong response from the child process.
Root Cause Analysis
In this subsection, we apply our technique to a ma-
jor performance issue highlighted by Theia develop-
ers (33). It relates to issue 95142: The performance
of vscode.workspace.fs.readDirectory(Uri) is a
hundred times slower than VS Code, and issue
106843: Improve JSON-RPC communication perfor-
mance. This specific issue has drawn much attention
and interest, and has been the subject of intensive
efforts. We were able to reproduce the performance
issue locally, in order to evaluate our technique and
show its usefulness and effectiveness.
To replicate the performance issue, we developed a
VS Code plugin that calls the fs.readFile function
to read a file. The plugin was explicitly tested in VS
Code multiple times, with files of various sizes, and
the average execution time was gathered. Then, we
injected the plugin into Theia and ran the same tests.
A significant performance issue was caused in Theia
when the file size exceeded 450 Kb. The compatibility
of Eclipse Theia, with VS Code plugins and exten-
sions, makes it a robust and adaptable framework,
chosen by numerous developers. Eclipse Theia is at
the core of several tools popular in industry.
Figure 13 depicts the outcomes of our experiments
with multiple files of different sizes. We perceive that
the processing time is acceptable for extremely small
files, but it begins to deviate from those of VS Code
when the file size exceeds 420 Kb. Beyond this, the
performance issue is obvious. Node Compass was
used to identify the root cause of the problem, and
demonstrate its efficacy in resolving such challenges.
Under Theia, reading a 500 Kb file required ap-
proximately 331 ms.
Figure 14 depicts a part of
the Theia vertical execution flow.
The latter in-
cludes information regarding the initial function
2 https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia/issues/9514
3 https://github.com/acmeair/acmeair-nodejs
12


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
Figure 12: Processes and threads interactions in Node.js. The arrows show the direction of the communications. The numbers are the
threads and processes IDs
Figure 13: VSCode and Theia file reading average time.
vscode_readFile_vs, executed by the plugin to send
the service information in the payload to the backend,
via websocket and JSON-RPC. When the relevant Re-
mote Procedure Call (RPC) service is invoked at the
backend level, atomic operations are generated at the
libuv level. Each I/O action in libuv triggers a sys-
tem call. This information is displayed in Figure 14,
where we can also note the vscode_readFile_vs
readFile method latency at around 331 milliseconds.
Clearly depicted in Figure 14, the node process that
runs the plugin enters the epoll_wait mode after
sending the request. Nonetheless, this does not ac-
count for the execution delay of the request. Digging
further into the execution flow of the request in the
backend, as depicted by the Control Flow perspec-
tive of Figure 15 on the top, it can be observed that
the read system call requires only 84 µs to perform.
After executing the method, the backend process re-
turns the response to the browser through Websocket.
By narrowing the instrumentation to the Theia func-
tions managing the communication layer, we observe
that most of the request time is spent at the JSON-RPC
communication layer. In this case, encoding binary
data into a string is extremely inefficient in terms of
performance. Mechanisms that allow sending direct
binary data through Websockets should be imple-
mented to handle such communications, instead of
encoding it. Such an approach would improve the
performance of the communication.
Evaluation
In this part, we measure the overhead associated with
collecting the traces, and the time necessary to run
our analyses. We also compare the overhead intro-
duced by Node Compass with other Node.js tools.
The primary purpose is to demonstrate a priori that
our approach incurs a low overhead, when collecting
data, in comparison to other Node.js analysis tools.
Our tool overhead is compared to that of
NodeRacer (10) and NodeAV (7). Although these two
tools are used to solve specific problems, we will con-
centrate on their user trace collection architectures,
which share with Node Compass the use of the Async
Hooks API to monitor the lifecycle of asynchronous
resources.
Figure 16(c) depicts the outcomes of the various
micro-benchmarks we conducted to assess the over-
head induced by the activation of Async Hooks. Ob-
servably, the activation of the Init callback imposes
an very high cost on the performance. When a new
asynchronous resource is created, this callback is ini-
tiated. As a result, it is possible to obtain information
regarding the execution context of the resource. As
can be observed, the situation deteriorates when all
callbacks are activated, because it becomes necessary
to monitor the resource initialization, execution start,
execution end, and the destruction. The challenge
lies in the tricky nature of resource tracking at the top
layer of JavaScript. Clearly, for each resource, the
JavaScript and C++ barrier must be crossed. This
results in a significant increase in costs.
Unlike Node Compass,
NodeRacer and NodeAv
utilise Async Hooks in this manner.
Unlike the
other tools, Node Compass does not activate the
JavaScript layer callbacks. Using the Async Hooks
module, information about the execution context is
obtained, whereas monitoring is performed at the VM
level. The instrumentation of the latter with LTTNg
enables the recovery of the execution context of the
resources at the lowest level, resulting in a cost on
the order of 8% for our method. To the best of our
knowledge, there is no multi-layered performance
analysis approach for Node.js that incurs a compa-
13


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
Figure 14: Plugin triggered vertical sequences. The sequences of libuv operations at the backend are presented along with the
websocket span obtained from the execution of the function in the plugin. Syscall represents the sequences of system calls triggered by
the plugin.
Figure 15: Vertical reading sequences of the Vscode plugin.
(a) Services duration (without instrumentation)
(b) Services duration (with instrumentation)
(c) Async Hooks performances benchmarks.)
Figure 16: Acmeair benchmark API paths. Time duration (Instrumented vs no instrumentation).
(a) Acmeair benchmark CPU usage without
instrumentation
(b) Acmeair benchmark memory usage without
instrumentation
Figure 17: Acmeair benchmark cpu and memory usage.
14


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
(a) CPU usage with instrumented Acmeair
benchmark
(b) Memory consumption with instrumented
Acmeair benchmark
Figure 18: Instrumented Acmeair benchmark cpu and memory usage.
rable low cost. The experimental version of Node
Compass is available for free download on GitHub4.
Acmeair5, a well-known benchmark for flight man-
agement applications, has also been used to test Node
Compass. Apache Jmeter was used to produce the
user load. The results of 2000 requests executed with
and without Node Compass instrumentation are dis-
played in Figure 16. As can be seen, the additional
cost incurred is acceptable.
Figure 17 and Figure 18 illustrate resources con-
sumption during the benchmark execution. Respec-
tively, with no instrumentation and with instrumen-
tation. We observe that the differences between the
two cases are not discernible in terms of memory and
especially processor usage.
We evaluated the cost of conducting our analyses
for various trace sizes. Figure 19 depicts the utili-
sation of the CPU (a) and memory (b) during the
loading and execution of the various trace-related
analyses. We can observe the distribution of interven-
ing threads over time, given the concurrent nature of
the analysis execution. As the execution time of the
analysis depends on the size of the collected trace,
Figure 19 (d) displays the results of the latter in the
context of different sizes. Instrumenting a Node.js
application with Node Compass allows to collect a
trace over time. The ratings provided represent the
worst-case scenario. It is not necessary to obtain a
kernel trace for each analysis. Some analyses do not
require their use and are limited to collecting a user
trace from the internal Node.js layers. Analyses such
as I/O processing rely on kernel events. The size of
a user trace is approximately 450 times smaller, in
comparison to a kernel trace, when all events are
collected.
4 https://github.com/dorsal-lab/tracecompass_nodejs_
support
5 https://github.com/acmeair/acmeair-nodejs
Conclusion
JavaScript is an environment with great poten-
tial and is the basis for thousands of applica-
tions currently in production worldwide. It enjoys
widespread popularity among developers (31; 29; 35).
Its flexibility and continuously expanding ecosystem
make it one of the most used distributed applica-
tion environments. Understanding the performance
of JavaScript applications is crucial for developers.
Therefore, tools and adequate approaches are neces-
sary to help detect the various problems at the basis
of performance degradations.
We introduced a novel technique based on the ver-
tical reconstruction of the execution flow of Node.js
applications. Vertical profiling and calling-context
profiling are effectively attained through the applica-
tion of two distinct techniques. Through the identifi-
cation of execution patterns in the trace, our method
correlates events between the various layers. The
end result is an interactive interface for identifying
potential performance issues.
Our technique enables performance analysis from
several angles. It is a global approach that sees the
system as being complex and dynamic, responding
to a certain number of expectations. Therefore, un-
like most tools that address specific problems, such
as atomicity violations, detection of race issues, or
that rely on higher level operations latency, to diag-
nose performance problems, Node Compass adopts a
multi-level approach. This enables the reconstruction
of the execution sequences of a task. In this context,
depending on the conducted analysis, the vast ma-
jority of performance issues can be pinpointed, each
in the responsible layer. The reconstruction of the
application execution flow is an essential element in
the granularity of the approach, in order to detect the
problem root cause. One exciting area to consider
for future work is to perform a critical path analy-
sis of the different requests under JavaScript, in a
distributed system context. It would allow a defined
execution model, and help reveal bottlenecks related
to specific requests processing and I/O threads man-
15


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
(a) CPU consumption during trace loading and
analysis
(b) Memory consumption during trace loading
and analysis
(c) Number of threads over running time
(d) Trace size vs analysis running time
Figure 19: Trace loading and analysis with Node Compass.
agement.
Acknowledgments
We would like to gratefully acknowledge the Nat-
ural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (NSERC), Prompt, Ericsson, Ciena, AMD
and EfficiOS for funding this project.
References
[1] Christoffer Quist Adamsen, Anders Møller,
Rezwana Karim, Manu Sridharan, Frank Tip,
and Koushik Sen.
Repairing event race er-
rors by controlling nondeterminism. In 2017
IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Soft-
ware Engineering (ICSE), pages 289–299, 2017.
doi: 10.1109/ICSE.2017.34.
[2] Christoffer Quist Adamsen, Anders Møller, Saba
Alimadadi, and Frank Tip. Practical ajax race
detection for javascript web applications.
In
Proceedings of the 2018 26th ACM Joint Meeting
on European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software En-
gineering, ESEC/FSE 2018, page 38–48, New
York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for Com-
puting Machinery. ISBN 9781450355735. doi:
10.1145/3236024.3236038.
URL https://doi.
org/10.1145/3236024.3236038.
[3] Marcos K Aguilera, Jeffrey C Mogul, Janet L
Wiener, Patrick Reynolds, and Athicha Muthi-
tacharoen.
Performance debugging for dis-
tributed systems of black boxes. ACM SIGOPS
Operating Systems Review, 37(5):74–89, 2003.
[4] Davide Ancona, Luca Franceschini, Giorgio
Delzanno, Maurizio Leotta, Marina Ribaudo,
and Filippo Ricca. Towards runtime monitor-
ing of node.js and its application to the inter-
net of things.
In Danilo Pianini and Guido
Salvaneschi, editors, Proceedings First Workshop
on Architectures, Languages and Paradigms for
IoT, ALP4IoT@iFM 2017, Turin, Italy, Septem-
ber 18, 2017, volume 264 of EPTCS, pages 27–
42, 2017.
doi:
10.4204/EPTCS.264.4.
URL
https://doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.264.4.
[5] AppDynamics.
Top
five
node.js
perfor-
mance metrics, tips and tricks, 2015.
URL
https://kapost-files-prod.s3.amazonaws.
com/published/55526fea6c1e4cdd7c0000c2/
ebook-top-5-node-dot-js-metrics-tips-and-tricks.
pdf.
[6] Giorgio Ausiello, Camil Demetrescu, Irene
Finocchi, and Donatella Firmani. k-calling con-
text profiling. In Proceedings of the ACM interna-
tional conference on Object oriented programming
systems languages and applications, pages 867–878,
2012.
[7] Xiaoning Chang, Wensheng Dou, Yu Gao, Jie
Wang, Jun Wei, and Tao Huang. Detecting atom-
icity violations for event-driven node.js appli-
cations.
In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pages
631–642, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ICSE.2019.00073.
16


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
[8] James Davis,
Arun Thekumparampil,
and
Dongyoon Lee. Node.fz: Fuzzing the server-
side event-driven architecture. In Proceedings
of the Twelfth European Conference on Computer
Systems, EuroSys ’17, page 145–160, New York,
NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Ma-
chinery.
ISBN 9781450349383.
doi: 10.1145/
3064176.3064188.
URL https://doi.org/10.
1145/3064176.3064188.
[9] Mathieu Desnoyers and Michel R Dagenais. The
lttng tracer: A low impact performance and
behavior monitor for gnu/linux. In OLS (Ottawa
Linux Symposium), volume 2006, pages 209–224.
Citeseer, 2006.
[10] André Takeshi Endo and Anders Møller. Noder-
acer: Event race detection for node.js applica-
tions.
In 2020 IEEE 13th International Confer-
ence on Software Testing, Validation and Verifica-
tion (ICST), pages 120–130, 2020. doi: 10.1109/
ICST46399.2020.00022.
[11] Apache Fondation. Apache jmeter. URL https:
//github.com/apache/jmeter.
[12] Cloud Native Computing Foundation. Open-
telemetry client architecture,
2022.
URL
https://github.com/open-telemetry/
opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/
specification/overview.md.
[13] Mohamad Gebai and Michel R. Dagenais. Sur-
vey and analysis of kernel and userspace tracers
on linux: Design, implementation, and over-
head.
ACM Comput. Surv., 51(2), mar 2018.
ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3158644. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3158644.
[14] Michael
Gokhman.
Node.js
event-loop:
How
even
quick
node.js
async
func-
tions
can
block
the
event-loop,
starve
i/o,
2019.
URL
https://snyk.io/blog/
nodejs-how-even-quick-async-functions-can-block-the-event-loop-starve-io/.
[15] Salvatore Guarnieri and Ben Livshits.
Gate-
keeper: Mostly static enforcement of security
and reliability policies for javascript code. In
18th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Secu-
rity 09), pages 151–168, Montreal, Quebec, 01
2009. USENIX Association. URL https://www.
usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity09/
technical-sessions/presentation/
gatekeeper-mostly-static-enforcement.
[16] Matthias Hauswirth, Peter F Sweeney, Amer Di-
wan, and Michael Hind. Vertical profiling: un-
derstanding the behavior of object-priented ap-
plications. In Proceedings of the 19th annual ACM
SIGPLAN conference on Object-oriented program-
ming, systems, languages, and applications, pages
251–269, 2004.
[17] Matthias Hauswirth, Amer Diwan, Peter F
Sweeney, and Michael C Mozer. Automating
vertical profiling. In Proceedings of the 20th an-
nual ACM SIGPLAN conference on Object-oriented
programming, systems, languages, and applications,
pages 281–296, 2005.
[18] Shin Hong, Yongbae Park, and Moonzoo Kim.
Detecting concurrency errors in client-side java
script web applications. In 2014 IEEE Seventh
International Conference on Software Testing, Ver-
ification and Validation, pages 61–70, 2014. doi:
10.1109/ICST.2014.17.
[19] David Janin. An equational modeling of asyn-
chronous concurrent programming.
In Alek-
sander Byrski and John Hughes, editors, Trends
in Functional Programming, pages 180–203, Cham,
2020. Springer International Publishing. ISBN
978-3-030-57761-2.
[20] Simon Holm Jensen, Magnus Madsen, and An-
ders Møller.
Modeling the html dom and
browser api in static analysis of javascript web
applications.
In Proceedings of the 19th ACM
SIGSOFT Symposium and the 13th European Con-
ference on Foundations of Software Engineering,
ESEC/FSE ’11, page 59–69, New York, NY,
USA, 2011. Association for Computing Ma-
chinery.
ISBN 9781450304436.
doi: 10.1145/
2025113.2025125.
URL https://doi.org/10.
1145/2025113.2025125.
[21] Vidisha
Jitani.
Monads
explained,
2021.
URL
https://towardsdatascience.com/
monads-from-the-lens-of-imperative-programmer-af1ab
[22] Magnus Madsen, Frank Tip, and Ondˇrej Lhoták.
Static analysis of event-driven node.js javascript
applications.
SIGPLAN Not., 50(10):505–519,
oct 2015.
ISSN 0362-1340.
doi:
10.1145/
2858965.2814272.
URL https://doi.org/10.
1145/2858965.2814272.
[23] Maximilian
Michels.
The
art
of
debug-
ging
distributed
systems,
2020.
URL
https://maximilianmichels.com/2020/
debugging-distributed-systems/.
[24] Eugenio Moggi.
Notions of computation
and monads.
Information and Computation,
93(1):55–92,
1991.
ISSN 0890-5401.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0890-5401(91)90052-4.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0890540191900524.
17


Node Compass: Multilevel Tracing and Debugging of Request Executions in JavaScript-Based Web-Servers
Selections from 1989 IEEE Symposium on Logic
in Computer Science.
[25] Philippe Moret, Walter Binder, and Alex Vil-
lazón. Cccp: Complete calling context profiling
in virtual execution environments. In Proceedings
of the 2009 ACM SIGPLAN workshop on Partial
evaluation and program manipulation, pages 151–
160, 2009.
[26] NearForm and Clinic.js. Clinic.js, 2022. URL
https://clinicjs.org/.
[27] Lionel Nkenyereye and Jong-Wook Jang. Per-
formance evaluation of server-side javascript for
healthcare hub server in remote healthcare mon-
itoring system.
In Elhadi M. Shakshuki, ed-
itor, The 7th International Conference on Emerg-
ing Ubiquitous Systems and Pervasive Networks
(EUSPN 2016)/The 6th International Conference
on Current and Future Trends of Information and
Communication Technologies in Healthcare (ICTH-
2016)/Affiliated Workshops, September 19-22, 2016,
London, United Kingdom, volume 98 of Procedia
Computer Science, pages 382–387. Elsevier, 2016.
doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2016.09.058. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.09.058.
[28] Eclipse
Org.
Trace
compass.
URL
https://projects.eclipse.org/proposals/
trace-compass.
[29] Tutorials Point.
Node.js tutorial, 2016.
URL
https://www.tutorialspoint.com/nodejs/
index.htm.
[30] Anastasia Rashevskaya.
Node.js architecture
from a to z, 2021. URL https://litslink.com/
blog/node-js-architecture-from-a-to-z.
[31] Hezbullah Shah and Tariq Soomro. Node.js chal-
lenges in implementation. Global Journal of Com-
puter Science and Technology, 17:72–83, 05 2017.
[32] Cristian-Alexandru Staicu and Michael Pradel.
Freezing the web: A study of {ReDoS} vulner-
abilities in {JavaScript-based} web servers. In
27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Secu-
rity 18), pages 361–376, 2018.
[33] TypeFox and Ericsson. Eclipse theia, 2019. URL
https://www.theia-ide.org/.
[34] Vincent Vallet. Node.js, lots of ways to block
your event-loop (and how to avoid it), 2020. URL
https://medium.com/voodoo-engineering/
node-js-lots-of-ways-to-block-your-event-loop-and-how-to-avoid-it-b41f41deecf5.
[35] Jiapeng Zhu.
A Scalability-oriented Benchmark
Suite for Node.js in the Cloud. PhD thesis, Univer-
sity of New Brunswick., 2018.
18
